---
layout: page  
---
In this blog post, we will apply Vintage Sparse PCA (vsp) on the microbiome data collected from the Earth Microbiome Project (EMP) to explore the microbiome patterns worldwide.  

1. Data description  
Earth Microbiome Project (EMP) uses a systematic approach to characterize microbial taxonomic and functional diversity across different environments and humankind (Thomson et al., 2017).  EMP comprises 27,751 samples from 97 studies with microbial data representing 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, metagenomes, and metabolomics. For this blog, we used a rarefied subset data composed of 2,000 samples representing all environments and humankind microbiomes created by EMP. The dataset is divided by (1) an operational taxonomic unit (OTU) table, (2) and sample table, and (3) a metadata table. Below is the column information for each table.  
    (1) OTU table: ID, Sequence, Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Genus, and Species.  
    (2) The sample table contains ID and Sample Name.  
    (3) Metadata table: 76 environmental information from each sample. For this blog, we used Sample ID, Environment Biome, and Environment Feature.  

2. Data manipulation   
To represent the biomes as a graph, we built an OTU-sample bipartite adjacency matrix, named A. For this, we used the R Matrix package.  Aij = x  was composed by OTUs as i, samples as j, and the number of OTUs observed in the sample as x. The dimensions of the A matrix was 155,002 rows and 2,000 columns. To examine the A matrix, we did a histogram and found that some OTUs were more abundant than the other, which is natural in microbial ecosystems.  

3. Clustering Microbiome into communities  
We used Vintage Sparse PCA (vsp) to cluster samples into 20 communities using the R vsp package. It is expected that sample sites with a similar beta-diversity (i.e. consists of similar numbers of specific OTUs) will be clustered together. The vsp function requires an adjacency matrix, the number of factors to be calculated, and whether to center/scale or not. As we hope to estimate the beta's in Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model, we will do vsp with centered and scaled adjacency matrix. Further, we will examine several diagnosis plots to check the vsp result.  
    (1) VSP with centering, scaling, and rescaling  
    ```r
    fa_center<-vsp(A.sel,rank = 20,center = TRUE,scale = TRUE,rescale = TRUE,recenter = FALSE)
    ```  
    (2) Diagnosis plot  
    - Check that streaks are well-aligned with factors with y-pair plot (use y-pair because we are looking at sample clusters)  
    ```r
    #plot the first 10 factors
    plot_varimax_y_pairs(fa_center,1:10) 
    ```  
    - Check the B matrix is roughly diagonal: if the purple encodings mainly exist on the diagonal, we say that the B matrix is a diagonal matrix.  
    
   (3) Reason for chosing rank=20  
    Based on two reasons: first, according to the original EMP paper (Thomson et al., 2017), its standard sample report regulation includes 17 levels of environmental features. Second, based on the scree plot, there is a drop around 20.  
  
4. Contextualizing clusters  
For contextualizing or characterizing the clusters using environmental information, we used the “best friend function” or bff from the vsp R-package. The bff function requires:  
    (1) n by k matrix of the weights that indicates how important it “i” for the “j” cluster  
    (2) a matrix that contains features for each node in the network (called sample_meta_mtx)     
    (3) a number indicating how many features for differentiating between loading we wanted    
  For exploratoin purpose, we contexualized the clusters respectively with two kinds of external feature data, one is environmental biome tpye, and the other is environmental feature type.We decided to use both, because each provided an interesting approach to contextualize the communities. The biome data classifies the environment as a habitat related to plants, animals, and climate (e.g., Tropical forest, temperate grassland). The feature data classified the environment as a particular component of the environment where the sample was collected (e.g. soil, coral, bay).  
  For each matrix, we used the component vsp matrix Y to find the biomes or  features that associated the most with the cluster memberships using the bff function. We chose to see only 10 features per cluster.  
    ```r
    library("Matrix") 
    sample_meta_mtx=cast_sparse(sample_meta_ID,ID,env_feature)#create sparse matrix for features  
    sample_meta_mtx2=cast_sparse(sample_meta_ID,ID,env_biome)#create sparse matrix for biomes
    #characterize clusters
    feature= bff(fa_center$Y, sample_meta_mtx,10)
    biome= bff(fa_center$Y, sample_meta_mtx2,10)
    ```  
    As a result, we got the following characterizations.
    To interpret the bff function results we need to understand how do environmental biomes or features grouped in each cluster relate to each other. Once we understand how biomes or features related to each other we will be able to contextualize or describe the microbiome representing each cluster. Contextualizing with the environmental biomes resulted in more complicated to interpret compared to the features. This complexity has to do with how general is the information provided in the biome variables. However, we can see some interesting groups. For example, V5 represents a cluster where many of the grouped biomes that could describe disturbed microbiomes. Cluster V11 shows biomes with high temperatures, high salinity, or high ionic activity in the water or the soil. Cluster 16 shows similar biomes as V11. The difference between V11 and V16 is that there are more biomes related to water in V16. Biomes may be too general categories for such diverse data, but many biomes were successful in specifying something about the cluster.  
  
  The environmental features were more effective in describing the clustering. For example, V5 represents a microbiome related to agriculture and farming. In some way, it is similar to the biomes characterization, however, with more detail. Cluster V11 shows features related to water, hot climates, and contaminated sediments, which was also very similar to what we interpreted from the biomes. However, the features in V16 do not seem so similar to cluster V11, like in the biomes. Cluster V16 in the features describe a cluster of microorganisms that associate with water or low oxygen environments. In sum, both biome and features provide characterization to the clustering. However, biomes may be too general to understand the microbiome of each cluster in our analysis. The features of the environment were more informative of the microbiome clusterings.  
  
5. Estimate cluster composition  
To further evaluate the cluster composition, LDA model is commonly used. As vsp can estimate the beta's in the LDA model, below we show the calculation steps and results.  
    (1) Use the Z matrix from centered, scaled, and rescaled vsp result (Z=fa_center$Z)  
    (2) Calculate phi=Z'A (where A is the centered adjacency matrix, called A.sel_center)  
    ```r
    A.sel_center<-A.sel
    entries_len<-length(A.sel_center@x)
    A.sel_center@x<-A.sel_center@x-(In%*%(t(In)%*%A.sel/n))[1:entries_len]
    ```  
    (3) Estimate betas    
    (4) Set negative betas to zero (reason: we are projecting onto the positive orthogonal, so there should only be positive values, and we regard negative ones as statistical errors)  
    (5) Check if each column (i.e. each community) sums up to 1  
    ```r
    phi=t(fa_center$Z)%*%A.sel_center
    library(wordspace)
    norm_phi=rowNorms(phi,method="minkowski",p=1)#calculate l1 norm for each row
    norm_phi_d<-diag(norm_phi) #20*20 diagonal matrix
    norm_phi_d_inv<-solve(norm_phi_d) #inverse of norm_phi_d
    beta<-t(norm_phi_d_inv%*%phi) #2000*20
    beta[beta<0]=0
    beta<-apply(beta,2,function(x) return(x/sum(x)))
    colSums(beta)#each column sums up to 1
    ```
    Figure 6 and Figure 7 show the cluster composition derived from the estimated beta's. One is the biome type distribution within each flock, and the other displays in terms of environmental features. Due to space limit, for biome type distribution only those with weight > 3% are shown; for environmental features, those with weight > 5% are shown.  
    Overall, it complements the results in the above table. Tables display features that are most correlated with each cluster, while estimated cluster composition allows us to see more details about how each feature occupies the cluster. Over time, this cluster structure change can be a critical index for many applications, such as examining effects of wastewater treatments, medical effects in humans, and etc.  





